so we're going to continue with our
discussion of clinical personality
theories today moving away from the
psychoanalytic or de psychoanalytic
theorists or the depth psychologists
we're going to start to talk about the
phenomenologists and the existentialists
and so I need to lay down a little bit
of background first and I think we'll
start with a a discussion of
phenomenology and
existentialism now for the
phenomenologist this is a tricky concept
to
grasp I think I'll actually start by
telling you that something you something
that Carl Jung wrote about in the last
book he published which was called
mysterium conjunction which means
mysterious
conjunction
um he sort of believe posited that there
was some extensions of moral development
past the higher
levels of moral development that PJ
identified um and there were three of
them and he said they could be
symbolized by masculine feminine
conjunctions or that they were in the
literature that he had researched which
was mostly alchemical literature from
the late Middle
Ages he said that one of the goals of
moral development or of
psychotherapy was to produce a union
between the emotions and the motivations
and and
rationality and you can see that that's
actually been a theme for all of the
theorists that we've talked about so far
I mean partly what Psychotherapy or
personality development seems to be
about is the continual integration of
the personality so that the the persons
the psyche isn't at odds with itself and
it can move forward with a minimum of
conflict that's something related to the
pedian idea of an equilibrated state so
if you're in an equilibrated
State you don't have the sense that
there are parts of you Waring against
other parts because you've been able to
weave everything together into a
coherent identity that covers the past
and the present and the future so the
first stage in yung's vision of what
constituted higher development was the
of the of rationality with emotion and
motivation and he saw that that was
symbolized in the literature that he had
reviewed by masculine Spirit feminine
emotions and and motivation bang
together in one thing so that then would
be the
United Mind and Spirit in a sense and
then the next stage which was symbolized
Again by the masculine feminine
symbolism it was the un united
mind spirit with the body and so what
that would mean is that once you got
your act together so to speak you would
implement it in your behavior so that
there was no contradictions between who
you
were in terms of how you thought and how
you felt and what you wanted and what
you were actually doing and modern
philosophers have describe what they
call a performative contradiction which
they've forly described as another type
of of lie essentially another type of
Deceit which is that you say one thing
and do another and it and it's
interesting because it's not it's not a
logical it's not a form of logical
deceit in a sense because your
conceptualizations are abstract and your
behavior is concrete but there can still
be a contradiction between the two
especially when you start to understand
that most of what your psyche is
representing are schema for action
rather than for representation
so the point is is that once your
emotions and your motivations are
working alongside your rational mind
really that your rational mind is
properly nested within them because
that's that's a much more accurate way
of looking at it then the next thing you
should do is act consistently in
accordance with who you are so that's
stage two both of those stages are
pretty easy to understand but the third
stage is is actually a phenomenological
stage you have to think
phenomenologically to understand it so
here's here's one way of thinking about
it so imagine that you go home and let's
say you've set up a
room and uh in that
room it's not a very nice room you know
maybe you've got some posters on the
wall and they're sort of hanging a
little cockeyed and you know there's
dust bunnies are Ming underneath the bed
and um you have piles of paperwork that
you haven't done and you know homework
and you know maybe there's the odd crust
of bread or so forth lying about and
when you walk in
there it's you in the room that's one
way of thinking about it but another way
of thinking about it is that when you
walk in there you are the room just like
you're the room when you're here because
the room makes up a part of what you're
experiencing
and the phenomenologist would say in a
sense that the best way to conceptualize
the self in its totality is what you
experience like everything that you
experience is you and so what that would
mean is that there's no difference
between putting the posters up on your
wall properly and cleaning underneath
the bed and maybe making it and
finishing your homework and putting the
room in order so that you feel confident
and calm there and maybe so that you
even enjoy being there or maybe even so
that it's beautiful there there's no
difference between that and fixing up
your own
personality so then you could say here's
another way of looking at it and I I do
this I believe that this is a very
profound way of looking at things so
then imagine that you could extend that
Viewpoint it's kind of easy to
understand when you think about it as
your own room CU you're in there quite a
lot and so maybe let's say you're in
your room 10% of the day so we could say
that the experiences that characterize
your room are 10% of you at least for
the time being and that you can have a
low quality experience in there or a
high quality experience in there
um then let's say that you start
generalizing that to the whole house you
know so then you can start thinking well
are there problematic places in the
house are there problematic
relationships among the people in the
house and those problematic
relationships are also used
and you can tell when there's a problem
because you encounter undesired negative
emotion in the in relationship to some
relationship or in some physical local
within the house and maybe you could fix
that you know little incremental bit by
incremental bit you could work on that
you could note that the negative emotion
that you don't want to have a rise
signifies something it signifies that
that situation in some sense is
nonoptimal and then you could work on
strategies to optimize that and you
don't do that until you stop making the
presupposition that there's you and then
there's the house it's like well the
distinction between you and where you
are is a very unclear distinction so
then let's say you're walking down the
street or you're going into a store and
maybe your manners aren't as good as
they could be because you know to be be
really socially sophisticated is a real
art you can learn it can take you
decades to learn how to do that properly
and people who are really really
socially skilled have a
much much higher quality existence
because no matter where they go they
immediately establish a relationship
with the people that they're talking to
and then it's not an impersonal and and
dead or aggravating interaction so you
know maybe they'll walk into a store and
the first thing they do if someone comes
up and helps them is they look at the
person and you know ask them how they're
doing and you know how their day has
been and they make a little relationship
and you know the person is kind of happy
about that because it sort of Pops them
out of their Persona role and then they
can have a little discussion about what
they're doing in the store and what they
want and then all a sudden it's a high
quality experience and that person
everywhere they go if they're skilled
like that so they're awake and they're
attentive and they're listening
everywhere they go they can have a high
quality interaction you know and people
who learn how to do that learn to do it
partly by noticing when they're in an
interaction with someone or somewhere
that if it isn't going in an optimal
manner or if it's producing undesired
negative emotion then there's something
wrong with the way that they're being in
that situation and they pay attention to
that and see if they can figure out how
to modify it a lot of it is attention
and listening which is there are key
component say to rerry and Psychotherapy
is attent attention and listening
so you might say well so so you can go
into your room and you can identify
little problems that are in your room
that you could fix that maybe you would
fix and so then you could start fixing
them and that improves the quality of
that particular environment and then you
can start to generalize Beyond you know
the locals that are more
specifically under your control because
if you're walking down blur for example
and you go into a store and you talk to
a clerk well the probability is pretty
high that the clerk is at least
reasonably functional so you should be
able to get beyond their barriers in a
sense and have a genuine interaction
with them without too much difficulty
but then maybe you're wandering down
blur and you run across someone who's
schizophrenic and maybe alcoholic at the
same time and well that's a part of your
experience that might supersede your
ability to transform right the the
phenomenologists and and people like
Rogers aren't making the claim that you
should be able to solve every problem
that you come across or even that you
should try because there'll be things
that you experience that are so complex
and problematic that you might make them
worse if you fiddle around with them you
know you got to be very careful not to
extend yourself dramatically beyond your
skill
level but you can certainly start in
isolated locals and if you stop presum
assuming a priority that there's some
radical distinction between you and the
environment that you happen to be in
because it's all your experience if you
stop making that subject object
distinction which is one of the things
the phenomenologists really objected to
because they concentrated on being as
such which was sort of lived experience
as the ground of reality rather than the
objective world is the ground of reality
if
you if you if you allow yourself to step
outside that dichotomy and you start to
understand that wherever you go
including the places that you're in a
lot that there's no distinction between
fixing up those places when you notice
that there's something wrong with them
and you could fix them up and and fixing
yourself up it's it it opens up a whole
new Avenue to getting your life together
because you know people always think
they have to work on themselves it's
like it's not this is one of the things
that the psychoanalysts I think didn't
get quite right although Yung touched on
it in his later work it's there's not
all of you isn't inside your head and
for the psychoanalysts a lot of what the
the work that you were doing on yourself
was on your on the relationship say
between your conscious and your
unconscious mind but tremendous amount
of that was sort of inside your skull so
to speak
but the phenomenologists the
phenomenological approach enables you to
start reconceptualizing the psyche if as
something that extends Beyond you and
and always will and so that you can work
on its
reconstruction at any level of analysis
where your own nervous system is
signaling to you that there's a problem
and the way it does that is well it's a
variety of ways but two of the most
reliable ways are negative
emotion there's a new paper for example
that shows that conscientiousness is
quite tight associated with proness to
guilt so that's the negative emotion
that seems to go with conscientiousness
but so guilt and anxiety and shame and
no sorts of emotions which are
unpleasant also simultaneously signal
the presence of a problem and so you and
and and what resentment that's another
good one so you can instead of having
those emotions as enemies you say well I
just want that to go away you can think
okay there's my my my being my embodied
being is signaling to me that something
is nonoptimal here and then and then
it's not an enemy it's it's because it's
it's something that's trying to improve
say the quality of your present
experience and your future experience
and if you don't push that aside or
pretend it's not happening or assume
instantaneously that it's the fault of
the environment or the person that
you're talking to then that can be
incredibly instructive negative emotion
is incredibly instructive but you have
to adjust your attitude so that you
understand that it's signaling to you
the presence of corrective information
if you could just figure out what that
information is and that can come from
anyone a person or a place or a thing or
or or yourself or you don't need to make
the
distinctions you know and so if you're
having an argument with your partner and
it's not going very well I mean it
there's a
tremendous tendency among people to try
to win the argument with their partner
but you can't win an argument with your
partner because then you win and they
lose and then you have a loser on your
hands and and if you do that a hundred
times maybe you're better at arguing
than they are for example or you know or
maybe they think more in an intuitive
way so they can't dance on their feet
quite as fast as you or maybe the
situation is reversed if you win the
bloody argument a 100 times you're not a
winner you're just someone who's beat up
your partner a 100 times what you want
to find out is what the hell is it that
they're talking about and sometimes that
takes a tremendous amount of patients
and they should be doing the same thing
to you because very frequently the
things that people are arguing about are
only the tiny it's like the snow on the
surface of of a glacier the real
argument is deep deep deep underneath
and unless you listen intently and for a
long period of time you'll never figure
out what it is you're arguing about and
then if you win the person won't be able
to talk about it and that problem will
be there for the rest of your
relationship and maybe for the rest of
your life like unless you solve the
problem it's not going to go
away now I'm going to start talking
about Rogers specifically
by by going over some of the things that
he had to say about listening because I
think I've learned more about listening
from Rogers than from any other
personality theorist or or
psychotherapist that I've encountered
now we we could go back to the
fundamentals of
psychotherapy I mean really what you're
doing in in Psychotherapy is trying to
help the person become a better person
and that's not exactly a scientific
formulation better person you know and
it's a tricky thing to get at because
people can be better persons in lots of
different ways merely the fact that
you're people vary in their temperaments
indicate that you know your way of being
a better person and your way of being a
better person wouldn't necessarily be
the same way you know because you it's
like maybe someone's great on the violin
another person's great on the piano the
great is the same but but the instrument
is different and and I and that's a good
way of looking at it and so partly what
you do in Psychotherapy and I think you
do this in any genuine relationship is
not only is the dialogue about how to
become a better person the continuing
dialogue is also always about just
exactly what constitutes a better person
so you're talking about the goal and the
process at the same time and what you're
doing is working it out so the the
people go into the conversation with a
specific orientation and the orientation
is generally with client and therapist
is the client comes with a with a
problem their life isn't acceptable in
its current
form and they come with one more thing
which is the desire to make it better
and and something that you should all
know because this will stop you from
tangling yourself up in your life to a
tremendous degree you cannot help
someone who hasn't decided that they
want things to be better unless they
make the decision that they want to make
things better forget it you're wasting
your time and all it'll do is hurt you
and and I should also tell you that that
was one of rogers's necessary
preconditions for Psychotherapy another
one was honesty and communication but
the the person who was coming in for the
therapeutic process had to be there
voluntarily and it's a weird thing and I
don't know how to account for it but I
don't think that you can talk someone
who doesn't want to have things be
better into wanting that they have to
come to that decision on their own so
they come in with having made that so
it's for example it's very very
difficult maybe it's impossible to do
Psychotherapy with someone who's been
remanded by the court you know because
they're there involuntarily and they'll
just put up a wall you know not always
but a lot of the time they'll just put
up a wall and just wait it out you know
you're not going to get in there with a
screwdriver and cry off that
shell so the person has to step forward
in a sense and say well you know there's
something not right about the way things
are going for me and it could be better
and I and someone else might be able to
help me figure that out so and that's a
really good attitude to have by the way
when you're listening to someone because
disagree with them or not or agree with
them or not there's always the
possibility that they will tell you
something you don't know and like lots
of times when people are talking what
they're trying to do is to impose their
viewpoint on another person you hear
conversations like this all the time
they're arguments really and they're
often ideological arguments it's like
you're right and I'm wrong or sorry that
never
happens I'm right and you're wrong and
I'm just going to hack at you until you
shut up or you agree really you'll never
agree because you just don't get someone
to agree that way it's it's not possible
but you might be able to cow them into
silence or
anger but that's a dominance hierarchy
thing that's not a real conversation
it's just just all you're doing is
establishing that you're you know a
lobster with bigger claws than than the
person that you're trying to pick out a
therapeutic conversation which is a
genuine conversation is one in which
both the people in the conversation are
oriented towards a higher state of being
while they're conversing and you can
tell when you're in a conversation like
that because it's very very
engaging in fact if the conversation
isn't engaging then that's a sign that
you're not having a conversation and
that's really useful thing to know too
because here's another thing I could
tell you that if you take to heart will
save you an awful lot of grief and
misery if you're talking to someone and
they're not listening shut
up just stop it's like you can tell if
they're not listening and if they're not
listening quit saying words it'll you'll
just feel like a fool anyways because
you're it's like you're throwing
pingpong balls against a brick wall you
know you're not getting anywhere if
they're not listening that's a sign that
the the S the situation isn't set up to
allow you to progress on the path that
you're choosing and so then you have to
stop and you think okay well what what's
going on here why is the person not
listening you know am I being too
forceful am I do they not understand
what I'm saying is it too much about me
um do they want to talk what's going on
maybe they don't want to be here there's
all sorts of possibilities but that's
when you have to wake up past what it is
that you're trying to impose on the situ
situation and explore and see what's
there and that's way more interesting
than trying to impose your Viewpoint
another thing is that if you're talking
to someone you know I like to talk to
people whose political beliefs are very
different from mine because I can't
really understand how someone's
political beliefs can be really
different than mine you know because
I've got kind of a coherent
representation of my beliefs but it's
very interesting to talk to people who
radically differ because they'll tell
you things that you haven't considered
that doesn't mean you have to agree with
them but it's it's much more informative
to walk away from a conversation Having
learned something that you didn't know
than it is having won the stupid
argument which you can't win
anyways and that's especially the case
when you're dealing with people who are
close to you that you H that you will
have around for the rest of your life
you cannot win an argument with them CU
all that'll happen is if you win they'll
get you back sooner or later they won't
listen to you the next time you have
something to talk about or or they'll
get resentful and then they won't be
helpful or it you just can't win an
argument with someone that you will have
repeated contact with what you can do
however is you can have a
conversation that's a real conversation
and maybe you can come to terms about
the thing that you're discussing and
that's negotiation you know it's like
well what do you want but you have to
really want to know it's like you're
we're having an argument okay what is it
that I would have to do because we're
having this argument what would I have
to do in order to satisfy you you know
and then other person will think well
there's nothing you can do to satisfy me
because you know I'm so mad at you it's
like that's not helpful the other person
has to think okay what are the
conditions for my satisfaction you know
so maybe you know your partner says
you're not paying enough attention to me
it's like all
right what do you want exactly you know
do you want to talk for 15 minutes at
breakfast or do you want to talk for 20
minutes at lunch or do you want to spend
an hour at night watching TV or or like
do you want me to act differently when I
come home and I'm at the door it's like
you you're feeling unattended to what do
you want well then they'll say well if
you love me you should be able to figure
that
out yeah that's wrong cuz you're stupid
you won't be able to figure that out cuz
you know what the hell do you know so
the other person unless they want to
Corner you into just being the kind of
loser who can't figure things out which
is why are they with you then you know
they need to think about that it's like
oh hm what is it that I want from this
person what would constitute more
attention right and that's making the
argument much more high resolution and
then it it gives the other person a
chance to actually respond and then you
have to allow your partner to be a
because of course they are so once you
tell them what you want you have to let
let them do it badly like 10 times
because they're never going to do it
right the first time so sometimes when
I'm I've
seen I've helped people sometimes with
marital problems and one of the things I
often recommend is that they they go on
a date you know they take each other
away from the their home where the kids
are usually or maybe not maybe they
don't have kids it doesn't matter and
they do something that's just focused on
each other you know and of course first
of all they tell me they don't want to
do that it's stupid it's like it isn't
by the way it's not stupid it's like oh
you don't want to go out and have an
enjoyable time with your partner you
think your relationship's going to
survive when all you do is snipe at each
other and and do horrible things
together it's like well no that's not
going to work so then they'll finally
say okay we'll go on a date they'll both
look disgusted by the whole idea and
then they go and it's like it's just
miserable right they like one person
says something to the other that
immediately sets them off when they're
out on the date because they're kind of
mad about going anyways and then they
come back and go well that just didn't
work and we're never going to do it
again it's
like no so you're telling me you're
never going to go out and do something
enjoyable with your partner again CU it
didn't work very well it's like people
don't think about it you know it's like
so maybe when you take your partner out
and you haven't been getting along it
takes you like 10 times before you have
it
relatively okay time but 10 times if
you're going to go out with them let's
say I don't know let's say you go out
with them every two weeks it's 25 times
and let's say you're going to be with
them for 30 years if you manage to you
know get your act together so that's 30
* 25 so that's 750 times so if you
practice 10 times then you might be able
to have 740
good times out together you know and
that's an underestimate so 10 times of
practicing is hardly a problem for for
that kind of return
so this is all part of this rogerian
like following this path is all part of
this rogerian process of listening and
listening is trying to figure out what
the hell the other person is telling you
and understanding at the same time that
they don't know like especially if
they're upset they're not even sure what
they're upset about and they don't know
what they want you know cuz you can you
can Corner them by saying well you want
to be attended to more what do you want
and they'll try some weird defense like
like I told you already like if you love
me you'd already know which is a cliche
and it's a foolish cliche so you can't
let that stop you I should I should also
tell you the sorts of barriers that
people will put up if you listen to them
too so so for example let me let me see
if I can think about it for a
bit
yeah well usually what happens is if
you're if you're pushing someone say but
this is in a listening sort of way it's
like what do you want why do you want
that what would be the conditions of
your satisfaction you're pushing them
fairly hard to clearly articulate their
concerns and sometimes they're afraid to
do that and if you're trying to hash out
an issue people usually have like five
routines they can go through one is they
block you with some you know cliche or
they say something annoying and then
maybe they've got one other verbal trick
after that and then once you push
through that then they cry or they get
angry and if if you still don't stop
then they stomp off and so if you're
going to have a successful conversation
about something difficult you need a
routine for each of those it's
like just because the person's angry
doesn't mean the conversation is over
and just because the person cries
doesn't necessarily mean that you're a
sadist it's often often tears are a
trick they mask anger so and what the
person is doing in part is they're using
their motions as a exploratory technique
to find
out how important is this what what
happens if I just break down will the
person shut up and if the person shuts
up they think oh it's not that important
right because they they've been able to
use a technique I'm not saying this is
conscious it's it's it's deeper than
conscious it's just how people rub up
against each other when they're trying
to figure out how things are structured
and so if you quit when they get upset
then they think oh well this thing isn't
so important that it's worth this much
upset but if you continue well then
they'll run away well one of the things
you have to do if you're in any kind of
relationship is you got to make a rule
which is you can leave but you got to
come back like we're not done with this
you can't run
off because it's not it's it's it's it's
breaking the the contract of the
conversation you got to stay and hash it
out so okay now I'm going to read you
some of the things that
Rogers talked
about all right so one of the things he
talked about is
this idea
called unconditional positive
regard
now I don't think that's a very good
phrase because unconditional positive
regard is one of those things that can
be turned into a new age cliche in two
seconds it's like well no matter what
you do I'll love you it's like
no there are lots of things you could do
that that that that that is just that's
just not going to Garner a lot of love
so unconditional positive regard like
it's not like there's not an idea behind
that because there really is an idea
behind that but it like like like I said
it got all new Agy after Rogers
formulated it and it sounds like well
all you have to do is be consistently
positive towards the person and you know
they'll flourish it's like first of
all you're going to have unconditional
positive regard for Hitler it's like no
and not only that you have a
responsibility not to have unconditional
positive regard for yourself or for
other people because what you're trying
to do is to make things better and so
that means that the things that make
things worse are bad you right if
there's better there's got to be worse
and if you're in favor of better then
you have to be not in favor of worse so
I'm going to untangle unconditional
positive regard a bit and like I said I
think Rogers used a his word choice
wasn't very good here's here's the
different way of thinking about it so if
you're in a relationship with someone
and this can even be a very short
relationship it could be the sort of
relationship you have when you go to
talk to someone in a store like I said
if you get sophisticated about it but
let's assume it's a longer term
relationship you have to decide if what
if if you're going to have that person's
best interests in mind when you have the
conversation you got to have that as
sort of the the Top Value in your value
hard the reason we're talking is because
I want things to be
better not better for me you know may be
better for me too but but the better for
me is a subordinate part of the better
the reason we're communicating is
because we both want things to be better
and then we both aren't absolutely sure
what it would mean for things to be
better we got to exchange information
until we figure that out and neither of
us are sure about how we're going to get
there and so we have to exchange
information until we figure out how to
get there and that's that's the
initial axiomatic precondition for a
true conversation and that's
unconditional positive regard it's like
I I regard the person I'm talking with
as someone who could transform in a
positive direction and who's willing to
attempt that and who will communicate to
that end even though they might screw up
and you know there's going to be things
in the way and the sorts of things that
the psychoanalysts talked about as
resistance and then they're going to
regard me the same way and you know I'm
also going to make mistakes along the
way
so now Rogers pointed out that in order
to to communicate with someone in that
manner you had to be willing to put
yourself in their shoes essentially and
he
said there you had to comprehend the
alternative phenomen field so which is
okay well I'm I'm here this is my
viewpoint coming out from this place and
now you have a Viewpoint and they're
similar enough so that we can
communicate about them but they're
different enough so that they're not
equivalent and the differences are
actually meaningful so now I got to sort
of Pop myself out of my framework put
myself in yours and figure out where
you're coming from and that's the goal
of the conversation so sometimes that
can even help you figure out where
you're coming from you know cuz you can
say well it sounds looks to me like
you're really angry and the person will
say well no I'm just I'm just uh I'm sad
it's like well they're all red they look
like they're going to bite you and say
no no it really looks like I think you
might be also a little bit angry and
they'll be angry about you saying that
of course but it it may also be that
their emotions are so jumbled together
in this sort of chaotic jumble that they
don't actually know what it is that
they're experiencing because it's it's
this terrible
unarticulated chaotic bodily state that
is signaling something but that hasn't
been articulated and so they're kind of
a mess and your careful observation as
long as they trust you and they should
trust you if they know that you have
their best interest whatever that is in
mind or at least that you're trying that
then they can trust you and then you can
help them
clarify what it is that they're feeling
you know what's sort of coming up from
the body and what that's associated with
and what they'd like to do with
it Roger says real communication
occurs and the evaluative tendency
avoided when we listen with
understanding now the evaluative
tendency he's talking about
is well let's let's simplify this a
little bit let's say I'm radically
leftwing and I'm talking to someone
who's radically right-wing and we start
talking about something like uh um
income distribution and the right-wing
person says
well let's say the leftwing person says
well there's all these people at the
bottom and they don't have a lot of
money and and a lot of the reason that
they're there is because you know theyve
they've encountered very very harsh
circumstances or maybe they have an
illness or something like that and uh
you know there's a real distribution of
intelligence and so lots of times people
are at the bottom because they just
don't have the cognitive resources to
climb and the right way Wier goes
rubbish rubbish the reason that they're
at the bottom is because you know they
don't work hard enough and they don't
take any care with with their long-term
thinking and so the left Winger says
well that's just Prejudice and the right
winger says well you're just a bleeding
heart liberal and poof that's the end of
the
conversation and that's the evaluative
tendency it's like you just come away
the same as you were when you entered
the conversation there's been no
exchange of information whatsoever all
there's been is a hardening of prejudice
and you can walk away feeling morally
Superior because you know you
demonstrated what a scum rat your
opponent is and how morally upright you
are
well that's the evaluative tendency
that's not a conversation that's going
to lead to progress if anything it's
going to lead to like increased feelings
of prideful arrogance on your part
because you know everything and on their
part too and like increased polarization
it's not a helpful way of communicating
you know and this sort of thing as we'll
see when we move into the more social
and political consequences of um failure
to communicate it's like that's a
microcosm of what goes wrong in a
society when it really starts to fall
apart you know when the individuals
within the society who have differing
viewpoints can no longer communicate the
whole society shakes and trembles and
you can think about this from a
democratic perspective too because you
might say what's the purpose of
Elections well people who are aligned
with a particular ology think well we
need to win the election because our
Viewpoint is
right but then you might ask yourself
well why are there these other
viewpoints and why do things go so bad
when one Viewpoint dominates so heavily
that everyone who has the other
Viewpoint you know gets shot that seems
like a bad thing so what exactly is
going on in a democratic State and
what's going on is that there is all
these different viewpoints and a lot of
them are temperamentally informed so we
know for example that liberals
are higher in
openness and lower in conscientiousness
than
conservatives and so the conservatives
are conscientious but they're not very
creative and open so they're good at
running things they're really good at
running they're good at being managers
and administrators for example but
they're not very good at being
Innovative the Liberals are good at
being Innovative because they're open
but they're not very conscientious so
like and that they they have to be less
conscientious in some ways if they're
going to be created because
conscientiousness can constrain
creativity and so for the society to
work properly the people with the
liberal temperament the conservative
temperament have to interact with each
other because the Liberals think up all
the new companies and the conservatives
run them so and then in the political
State per se it's like conscientiousness
is a
virtue although it if it's it
exaggerated too much especially the
orderly part then it can become tyranny
and openness is a virtue too but you
don't want every bloody thing changing
every second so there's got to be
some constant negotiated piece
between order and Innovation and the way
that that happens is that the two sides
communicate it isn't that one side wins
or the other side wins it's that the
dialogue stays open so that the
viewpoints can be represented properly
and so that as the environment moves
because sometimes maybe the environment
is such that being conscientious is
going to be better and sometimes it's
going to be the environment has moved so
that openness is going to be better
because the environment
moves the conversation has to track
those movements so the society stays
healthy across time and the same thing
applies in any kind of long-term
relationship it's like you marry someone
now you've got two brains and they don't
work the same it's like you want to have
two brains or do you want to have one
that's the first question you're going
to do a lot better with two so and then
so how do you optimize the functioning
of the two brains well obviously they've
got a community communicate you know
there's got to be freedom of expression
and there has to be
listening so that's the evaluative
tendency which is you're
wrong before I even know what you're
talking about at least I should know
what the hell you're talking about
before I decide if you're wrong and so
back to the poverty issue it's like well
what predicts poverty well the sorts of
things that the left Winger talks about
that predicts Pro poverty so do the
sorts of things that the right-winger
talks about so if you're really
unconscientious and that makes you kind
of you makes you the sort of person that
will rely on others to do the work if
you're unconscientious you're much more
likely to be poor and so that's a real
social policy problem too because you
have this horrible problem where you
have to sort out what's causing the
poverty you know and who's taking
advantage of the attempts to alleviate
it as well as figuring out so so that's
more of an individual temper government
problem which is what the conservatives
are concerned about and then you also
have to figure out how to address it on
a social level which of course the
conservatives don't like to think about
but it's not like either side has
nothing to say there's information in
both those perspectives it's problematic
though because when you put them
together the phenomena becomes
paradoxical and then it's very difficult
to come up with a solution it challenges
your cognitive resources and what the
conservative and the liberal want to do
is just simplify it down to one
explanation it's sociological that's the
liberal it's temperamental that's the
conservative and so then they have one
answer to how it can be fixed we should
fix Society that's the liberal those
people should just get their act
together that's the conservative it's
like yeah well fair enough except
probably the problem is complicated
enough so there's more than one solution
necessary since it's not even a
problem right poverty is not a problem
poverty is like 10,000 problems and some
of them aren't even associated with each
other you know like there's the the
poverty that's a consequence of
alcoholism that's not the same poverty
that's a consequence of say very low
intelligence and that's a completely
different poverty than the non-c
conscientious poverty or the abuse
poverty or and there's no reason to
assume whatsoever that those should be
amenable to the same
Solutions real communication occurs and
the evaluative tendency avoided when we
listen with
understanding understanding that's an
interesting word because you might ask
yourself what do you mean when you
understand and it's got this sort
of
physical aspect to it right that's the
stand and then there's the underp part
which sort of implies that to understand
something is to be under it and standing
and so partly what happens is if if I
can listen to you with understanding
what that means is that I get a clear
enough picture of what you want so that
I could change the way that I am that I
am maybe the way I look at things like
the perceptual scheme through which I
view the world but also my actions and
if I can extract that from you then I
understand I would be able to take what
you told me and change myself if I felt
that was appropriate or maybe it would
just happen automatically because now I
have a deep understanding of you people
are afraid of that right because let's
say you've got yourself all hemmed in
with some ideology and you're feeling
pretty secure about that and then you
listen to some dim wit who's got
completely the opposite perspective from
you and you listen hard and all of a
sudden you got cracks in your system you
know and then you have to think oh maybe
things are more complicated than I
thought they were everything isn't all
tied together in this neat little
package and that can be unsettling it's
unsettling in fact if you're listening
to someone and you're really listening
and you're not being unsettled the
probability is pretty high either that
you're not listening or that you're not
talking about anything of real
consequence because if it's important
and you're listening it's going to shift
you you know so there's this it's going
to set you into that at least a little
bit into that state of chaos and what
you're doing then just so you know is
that instead of identifying with who you
were which is the person that you were
before the conversation you're
identifying with the person you could be
as you move through the conversation and
that's a way better thing to identify
with you know you going to identify with
your beliefs this is a pan idea are you
going to identify with your beliefs or
you going to identify with the process
that allows you to generate beliefs and
often those things are in
contradiction cuz if you identify with
the process that allows you to change
your beliefs then you're you're you're
assaulting your beliefs even though you
might be correcting them but it's it's
it it's demanding to do that because
you're reconfiguring your physiology and
there's an intermediary period of
uncertainty that goes along with that
what if they're right well then what
it's like yeah well then
what real communication occurs in the
evaluative tendency avoided when we
listen with understanding what does this
mean it means to see the expressed idea
and attitude from the other person's
point of view to sense how it feels to
him to achieve his frame of reference in
regard to the thing he is talking about
so there's also Rogers is very
emphasizes very much the idea of
embodiment so you can listen to
someone you can listen to their
arguments with your mind it's a very
logical process it's sort of a rational
and logical process and in some sense
that's what you're taught to do for
example when you debate and the idea
there is that you know the
argument is is a cognitive phenomena and
that the the logic is structured in a
logical way and that the way that the
argument is settled by is by the
exchange of information and the relative
coherence of the two perspectiv it's a
very rationalist IC perspective and it's
very useful to be able to debate don't
get me wrong and and to have your mind
organized so that you can put forward a
logical arguments like that's why you're
in University so to learn how to do that
believe it or not and but it's not the
same sort of thing that Rogers is after
because when Rogers talks about the
interactions between people it's
embodied so like if I'm really watching
you when I'm talking to you paying
attention to your face you're going to
be like expressing emotions with your
face screen because that's what it does
right your face expresses emotions so
that other people can infer what it is
that you're up to even more than you
know cuz if you knew you could just tell
them you wouldn't even need emotions but
what the hell do you know about what you
want that's why you're having a
conversation with someone to figure it
out so you're watching them like mad and
you're watching their posture and maybe
you're mirroring them and you can do
that consciously to some degree but it's
probably better if you just do it
unconsciously and then when you're
mirroring them with your body then you
can feel what their feeling and then you
can start to draw inferences about what
it is that they want by noticing how
you're feeling this is often one of the
things that'll stop people dead in the
source of a conversation because the
other person will get upset and then
you'll watch that and then that'll make
you feel upset and then you go oh I
can't deal with this anymore because
it's too upsetting it's like well H
maybe the fact that it's upsetting is
actually an indication that you really
should deal with it you know you can't
just run away if it's upsetting
upsetting something's being flipped over
that's why it's upsetting well you don't
want to bail out just because you're
upset it's like you know clue in that's
not the time to quit you want to maybe
detach a bit from your emotions so you
don't get drowned in them so you can use
them in an informative manner but you
don't want to stop that's you got things
going
then stated so briefly this may sound
absurdly simple well I didn't state it
so briefly but it's not it's an approach
which we have found extremely potent in
the field of psychotherapy it is the
most effective agent we know for
altering the basic personality structure
of an individual and improving his
relationships and his Communications
with others if I can listen to what he
can tell me if I can understand how it
seems to
him if I can see its personal meaning
for
him if I can sense the emotional flavor
which it has for him then I will be
releasing potent forces of change in H
well so you can imagine like your brain
is always trying to figure things out
well let's extend that a bit it's not
just your brain it's your psychop
physiology it's your whole body is
trying to figure things out right and
and you can't just think about it as a
logical and mental process like your
emotions are they're evaluative
processes they're trying to give you
information but they're not very
articulate you know it's like you come
home and you're all angry and you're
touchy and your partner says something
that's you know pretty mundane and you
you know you just explode it's like well
they say to you why are you like that
and they say well I hate it when your
boots are in the way of the door it's
like oh that's why you're having a fit
is it cuz the boots are well they're
always there it's like you could be sure
that there's a big mess underneath that
and it's going to be hard to approach
that person because angry people are
also kind of you know they're kind
of well they're irritable for sure but
they also have this kind of shell on
them that is touchy they're touchy so
you if you touch them you know they'll
get irritated at you and
so if you mirror that if you're
listening to them and watching them then
they can start to figure out that
they're angry and that maybe they're too
more Angry than the situation demands
and if you listen to them be angry for a
while which is very annoying right
because maybe they'll be angry at you
then maybe they'll calm down and they'll
start
to differentiate that emotion into
articulated statements it's like well I
had a really terrible day at work well
what was so terrible about it then he'll
tell you a little story and then they'll
say well that's happening all the time
and then you ask them about that and
then they say well my boss is
unreasonable in his demands and so then
you ask him about that and you and you
find out that the person e either has a
tyrant for a boss cuz sometimes that
happens right a real bully which when
and then the answer to why they're mad
about the shoes is because they should
change jobs right or maybe you find out
that well they have no idea how to say
no to their boss they just say yes no
matter what he or she says and that
means they're too agreeable and then
maybe you have to figure out how they
can learn how to say no and how they
have to sort of check with their
resentment to figure out when they're
being taken advantage of it's like it's
very very
complicated and it's no wonder people
want to avoid it but you know that's
another sort of truism if someone's
overreacting well they're not reacting
to that thing they're reacting to that
thing plus a whole bunch of things that
are related to that thing sort of and
they don't know what it is and so then
if you listen to them and they talk
about it they're actually thinking
because what you might think when you're
talking is that you think and then you
say what you think and so you you don't
have to talk you could just think but
that isn't right most people don't
really think like they're
not they don't sit down and meditate and
like think logically through a whole
sequence of problems the thought sort of
appear in their heads you know
spontaneously sort of like a revery but
they're not really
they're not philosophers you know they
don't have that kind of command of the
language and so then when they're
talking to you they're actually thinking
they're thinking out loud and for all we
know maybe thinking is more effective
when you say it out loud
because maybe I'm wired up so that my
brain assumes that if I'm willing to
tell it to you to make it public that
it's more true than those things I'd
like to keep to myself and so one of the
things you're doing in a
psychotherapeutic session is you're just
letting the person
talk and you know I have clients they
don't want me to do anything for the
hour that I'm with them except shut up
and listen and maybe now and then I can
just clarify something I have one client
in particular who's very isolated
socially isolated and and this person
has come to see me for a long time and
they just wanted this person comes every
two weeks and what they want to do is
talk about the last two weeks and they
want me listen and so I have I have to
be engaged right I'm listening
and and that's a communicative process
listening right because your face is
changing and you're nodding and you know
you're reacting so you're in the
communication but this person just wants
to talk and then they sort themselves
out you know and figure out what it is
they're upset about and then that's good
and they can go off and operate in the
world for two weeks and that's all just
listening well just listening listening
is hard and people aren't taught how to
do
it if I can listen to what he can tell
me if I can understand how it seems to
him if I can sense its personal meaning
then I will be releasing potent forces
of change in
him if I can really understand how he
hates his father that that could be a
conversation that go on for months or
hates the University or hates
Communists if I can catch the flavor of
his fear of insanity or his fear of atom
bombs or of Russia you can tell that
this is a little old it will be of the
greatest help to him in altering those
very hatreds and fears and in
establishing realistic and harmonious
relationships with the very people and
situations towards which he has felt
hatred and fear so for example let's say
someone comes into a therapeutic session
they say geez I just I was just having a
conversation my my father I just hate my
father every time I talk to him it just
makes me angry and like that's a that's
a low resolution representation right
it's like one pixel father equals anger
it's not differentiated and that's a
problem because like their bod is
responding as if this person needs to be
taken out like you might take out a prey
object or something like that or
destroyed because that's what anger is
like right anger is sort of like you're
an object to be destroyed and it's
there's truth in that because it
wouldn't be elicited by the father
unless there was some necessity for the
anger but it's so generalized and Global
it's not helpful it's like okay let's
talk about your father well how would
you do that well what did he do recently
to upset you and then you listen and you
don't give the person advice about what
they should have done cuz what the hell
do you know about what they should have
done you might have to listen for 50
hours before you could offer a helpful
suggestion even then it probably won't
work so you listen and then they tell
you some stories about this is almost
like the Freudian psychoanalytic
approach they tell you some stories
about what their father was like when
they in their childhood and then a bunch
of things that pop up in memory and you
know they start laying out the story
it's like they're laying cards out on a
table and they just lay out all these
cards there's like a thousand cards and
they're all representations of the
father and then they sort of exhaust
themselves they're out of angry stories
about their father and then maybe they
say well you know there he wasn't all
bad then they start laying out some
things about him that you know he drank
all the time but he was really he always
took care of us and he wasn't he wasn't
an angry drunk you know and and he
stayed with my mother and you know so
what's happen now is the picture of the
father is getting differentiated right
it's not just one pixel it's
differentiated and then you might say
well okay here's all these angry things
how many of them are still relevant like
how many of those do you have to deal
with and the person will say think well
these you know 80% of these anger things
are dead they're in the past and you
know 70% of these good things weren't
good enough to make up for the rest of
this mess but then you get a smaller
pile of specific things and then maybe
you can start figuring out ways that or
the person can start figuring out ways
that those might be addressed moment to
moment in new conversations like it's a
strategic plan what's the
situation what exactly is going on here
lay it out and the emotions are a great
guide to that because the first thing
you want to do is everything that makes
you
emotional those are the things that
aren't dealt with yet they're not fully
articulated you don't have a strategy
you don't have a full developed
representation system that's why it's
still emotional so it's like your your
body and your mind come up with
emotional representations first and only
as you work through them which means to
talk about them essentially
strategically they don't even turn into
words until you do that and that that's
where I think Freud went wrong it's
those things aren't repressed although
they can be they're not repressed they
just never made it all the way up to
articulated
representation and lots of things are
like that whenever you're in a bad mood
it's like I'm in a bad mood
what does that mean well you don't know
why don't you know are you repressing it
no you're just too stupid to figure it
out and so then you got to talk to
someone you I'm in a bad mood and you
know well you know how are you feeling
they they'll get all spiteful and tell
you how they're feeling and then you
know they start to differentiate it
maybe they'll remember something that
happened at work and then you can kind
of map out the mood and that starts to
loosen
it
we know from our research that such
empathic understanding understanding
with a person not about him is such an
effective approach that it can bring
about major changes in personality some
of you may be feeling that you listen
well to people and that you have never
seen such
results the chances are very great
indeed that your listening has not been
of the type I have
described fortunately I can suggest a
little laboratory experiment which you
can try to test the quality of your
understanding
okay so this is this is lovely because
you don't often actually get a technique
from a therapist that actually works you
know you get sort of vague techniques
like help the person lay the cards out
on the table you know it's it's kind of
at a high level of
abstraction but this exercise you can
actually do and you can do it a lot and
if you do it it will teach you to listen
so the next time you get into an
argument with your wife or your friends
or with a small group of friends stop
the discussion for a moment and for an
experiment Institute this rule while you
also don't have to be that formal about
it you can just do it once you know the
the
game each person can speak up for
himself
only after he has first restated the
ideas and feelings of the previous
speaker
accurately and to that speaker
satisfaction now that's so cool because
here's the typical AR argument so we're
arguing I want to win and so you tell me
a bunch of things and so then I take
those things and I turn them into the
stupidest possible representation of
those things you know I weaken your
argument and make you look like a fool
and then I destroy it and that's a straw
that's by that you're making your
opponent into a straw man that's the
straw man argument right you take you
take what they're telling you and you
caricature it and that way you can make
them look absurd and make them be
ashamed and then of course youve set up
this skinny little opponent that you can
just demolish with one punch it's really
crooked and it shows that you're a
coward because what it means is you have
to have an opponent that's you know
crippled and and thin and starving and
and inarticulate before you could
possibly win before you could possibly
progress It's a pathetic way of having
an argument what you should do is listen
to the person and help them make their
argument as strong as you possibly can
and then deal with that because then
you're sure that you're you're taking
them seriously
so and to that speaker's satisfaction
well that's so cool La so we're we're
having an argument I don't know maybe we
have an argument about who's going to be
responsible for grocery shopping or for
doing the dishes or for cooking or any
of those domestic things that
continually cause couples to be at each
other's throat it's like so you'll have
some arguments about why you should do
whatever it is that you're going to do
and in order for the argument to
progress I have to tell you back what
you said and you have to agree that I
put it properly well that's so annoying
like it just runs so contrary to what
you want to do of course you want to
make other person sound stupid so you
can beat them this way you can't do that
because you have to listen well enough
so you actually understood what they
said and then you have to formulate
their argument so that they're willing
to agree that that actually constitutes
their argument well that's really it's
difficult but it's so use useful because
first of all it does mean that you
understood them and second it indic
immediately indicates to them that
you're not just trying to win you're
trying to listen and then they're much
less likely to get all irritable and
angry at you because at least you're
trying to listen you're not making them
into a fool and you know often when
people are trying to tell you what they
want because they're all afraid of
telling you what they want because you
know maybe they never got what they
wanted in their whole life you know if
they've had a history of bad
relationship and poor parenting and that
sort of thing they're just bloody
terrified to tell you that they might
actually want something and so as soon
as you indicate to them that you
actually heard what they said and you're
willing to take it seriously enough to
formulate it properly well then it's
like one step towards trust I see you
did listen you at least know where I'm
coming from it's like that doesn't mean
you agree you know just because you
understand someone's argument doesn't
mean you have to agree but at least you
know what the argument
is you see what this would mean so one
of the things Rogers does continually in
his therapy and I do this a lot it's
like I listen to the person and then
kind of go through a narrative it's
spontaneous narrative often following a
chain of associations as Freud pointed
out they'll tell me a spontaneous
narrative and I'll say okay it sounds to
me like this is what you said and I'll
try to you know lay out the argument and
maybe now and then I'll I'll ask for
clarification if there's a part I didn't
understand or if I see that there's a
part that seems contradictory you know
they said this thing here and this thing
there and and I'll tell them that you
know seems to me that you said this here
and this here and I'm not sure how to
put those together I don't say well that
makes your argument you know incoherent
I say well I don't get how to understand
that and they kind of go oh yeah there's
because people will admit to that if if
you just point it out flatly you know
it's like I'm not involved I'm just
listening it's not my problem it's a
problem and that's another thing that's
useful too the other person
is entitled to their suffering you don't
get to take it away it's their Destiny
so you can listen to their problems
without having to think that you know
you have to take them on as if they're
yours you have to mirror them but it's
their problem it's like they have to
figure it out and they and that's good
you need a problem to figure out it's
not necessarily a terrible thing that
they have a
problem it would simply mean that before
presenting your own point of view it
would be necessary for you to really
achieve the other speaker's frame of
reference to understand his thoughts and
feelings so well that you could
summarize them for him and that's useful
too because you know the way we remember
things is if you tell me a long story
and I tell it back to you I do not tell
it back to
you what happens is I listen to it and I
try to figure out what the thread of the
argument
is and then when I tell it back to you
it's way shorter and Tighter and that
means in some sense it's it's got all
the essentials but it's got less of the
baggage right that's what you're kind of
doing when you ask someone to get to the
point so they tell you this long story
it's like this tree that is it's full of
dead branches and it hasn't been pruned
and there it's standing there and you
know the maybe the living branches you
can hardly even see but you're
concentrating on them and then when you
tell it back to them you just tell them
the part of the story that's alive and
they listen to that they think oh yes
that's what I meant and then that means
you've changed memory right if they
agree you've changed the memory you've
you've divested it of all the excess
baggage just like pruning and that's
what you're doing and so that that
dialogue is it's mental
hygiene and that's what people do you
know you got to wonder well why do we
talk well it's to exchange information
yeah and there's utility in it you know
like if you know how to do something and
I don't you can tell me but that that
isn't the sort of thing that people are
doing most of the time most of the time
they're telling their stories this is
what happen happened to me right and
there and then the other person will say
well this is what happened to me and
there's this Mutual attempt to organize
that's how people are organizing their
brains we organize our brains by talking
and so if you don't have someone to
listen to you well especially if if it's
over a few decades you're going to have
a brain that's like a whole Forest of
trees that need it needs a forest fire
it doesn't need just some you know
trimming it's really in trouble so you
need to have someone to listen to you
and best way to get someone like that is
to find a bunch of people and listen to
them because you know of course then
they'll that's a friendship that's a
real friendship you know because you're
both trying to move towards a better
place whatever that place is and it's a
great relationship then sounds simple
doesn't
it but if you try it you'll discover
it's one of the most difficult things
you've ever tried to
do however once you've been able to see
the other person's point of view your
own C comments will have to be
drastically revised well that's partly
because now their sort of vague
complaint is tightened up to a specific
problem well then you have to
reconfigure how you're responding to
address that problem you will also find
the emotion going out of the discussion
the differences being reduced and those
differences which remain being of a
rational and understandable
sort if you really willing to understand
a person in this way if you're willing
to enter their private world and see the
life the way their life appears to them
you run the risk of being changed
yourself which is that's a good thing if
you're involved in a real conversation
the way that you will change will be
beneficial to you but it's but it's it's
a challenging thing because it'll mean
that you can't stick to the little you
know rigid framework that you had
entering into the argument you have to
loosen that up and be willing to open
the door and you know change the walls
of your
house
you might see it his way that wouldn't
be good you might find yourself
influenced or your in your attitudes or
personality the risk of being changed is
one of the most frightening prospects
most of us can face well imagine so
you're trying to build yourself in to h
a fully-fledged you well here's one way
of doing it just hang around with people
like you who think the same way you do
and then whenever you talk they just
reflect back what you have to say or you
can start putting yourself in situations
that you're uncomfortable with you know
pushing yourself a little bit and you go
out where there are people that aren't
like you and then you think well how am
I going to get to understand these
people and the first thing you do is you
got to pay attention and you got to
listen and then maybe you'll be able to
interact with them and then poof that's
another environment that you've mastered
and then there's more of you cuz now you
can operate here and here and then maybe
you think well that was kind of fun so
now I'll go here and I'll try this and
you go there and you listen and you pay
attention and all of a sudden bang you
you can operate there and if you do that
over like a 15-year period you'll be
someone who can go anywhere and and not
fit in exactly that that's like you're
invisible it's not like you're fitting
in it's like you can operate there you
can talk and listen you can gather
information you can trade you're useful
there and then you're not going to run
up against people and you know risk
unnecessary conflict because if you
listen to people you just cannot believe
what people will tell you if you listen
to them it is ABS and you can if you can
listen to people they will tell you
profound things so fast that it just
makes your head spin you know because
people are really weird creatures
they're like dovi characters they're
they're they're peculiar they think in
weird ways and they have weird
experiences and bizarre dreams and ideas
about the future and political theories
they're just as crazy as you could
possibly imagine and if you listen to
them they'll tell you why they think
these things and it's it's it's not
boring that's another issue is if the
conversation is boring you are not
listening cuz if you're listening the
conversation will change so that it
won't be boring so you can tell if
you're in a conversation that's
boring someone at least is not listening
and it could easily be
you if I enter as fully as I am able
into the private world of the neurotic
or psychotic individual isn't there a
risk that I might become lost in that
world most of us are afraid to to take
that risk the great majority of us
cannot listen we found ourselves we find
ourselves compelled to evaluate and the
evaluation is I'm going to keep you away
I'm going to pigeon hole you classify
you make the classification negative
describe you as irrelevant and push you
aside because then I don't have to pay
attention to you I don't have to listen
and I can stay in my box of certainty my
little narrow box of
certainty the great majority of us
cannot listen we find ourselves
compelled to evaluate because listening
is too dangerous the first requirement
is courage and we do not always have
it okay so true Carl
Rogers he's a phenomenologist so he
thinks it's your experience that's real
you need to represent that experience
and you need to communicate it to other
people and you have to communicate it
within a frame and the proper frame is
we're trying to make things better here
and you know in order to adopt that
frame that's not just a simple statement
right I mean you can tell yourself that
try to put yourself in that state of
mind but to do that you have to really
think through your value hierarchy you
have to decide like what are you up
to are you here to make things worse or
are you here to make things better and
you know you might say well clearly I'm
here to make things better it's like
yeah sure sure no that's hard and people
are full of resentment and fear and
anger and they've been hurt in all sorts
of ways and they want to take revenge
and like they're just full of
contradictory impulses and so to weave
all those contradictory impulses
together and to overcome all those hurts
and disappointments and and reasons for
revenge and
resentment you got to do all that before
you can say well I'm you know here to
make things better because if you're
still possessed by those sorts of
experience es and contradictions you're
going to be motivated to make things
worse all the time just out of Revenge
and spite you know you you've been hurt
you're going to hurt and so to adopt the
framework that Rogers is talking about
is it's it's a difficult Enterprise and
partly it'll come about the more you
listen because the more you listen and
you have the chance to exchange
information the more you'll deal with
those inner contradictions and that sort
of collection of hurts and and
irritations that that are corrupting you
and twisting you in the wrong direction
so the reran perspective is extremely
useful I it's very useful the reason I
concentrated on that one quote of his
today is because that's such a useful
thing you you can try it right away the
next time you're talking to someone
maybe you have a friend who wants to
talk things over it's like listen to
them and then when there's a pause say
well it sounds to me like this is what
you meant and they'll go yes that's
exactly what I meant maybe if you were
really listening they'll be real happy
about that CU they didn't know what they
meant they're just telling you this
story about why they're
annoying and so then you'll think oh wow
I got it and then they'll be happy and
they'll tell you something else and like
they'll walk away from that conversation
much lighter and you will too even
though it's a weird thing because you
might think well if you listen people
are going to dump a bunch of trouble on
you it's
like well yes but if if you're willing
to listen despite the fact that there
might be a bunch of trouble dumped on
you then you've also told yourself that
you're the sort of person that can
tolerate having a bunch of trouble
dumped on yourself and that's like
that's a that's an extremely positive
attitude to take towards yourself you
know and you're not just saying it
you're acting it out and so that's a
sign of faith in yourself and you're not
Stu well I said you were stupid like you
are in relationships but you're not
totally stupid you know you'll be able
to notice that you've you've you've been
willing to expose yourself to a risk and
when your body and your mind you're
watching that they'll think oh I'm the
sort of thing that can voluntarily
expose itself to a risk well that's like
the secret to making yourself strong
it's exposure and so you can do that in
every conversation and that toughens you
up as well as informing you it's a very
powerful technique so I would recommend
try it see what happens it's it's also
fun because it's like you're following a
thread of the conversation if you're
really listening the conversation will
continue and it continues in a
meaningful way and then you know that
you're in the right place and it's like
a challenge to your capacity to pay
attention and then you get engaged in
the conver all conversations you get
engaged in them and then you're in
engaging conversations all the time
that's good thing so okay we'll see you
there's